---
title: BYOB
published: true
layout: post
---

Christopher Chedeau posted [an interesting challenge](http://blog.vjeux.com/2015/javascript/challenge-best-javascript-setup-for-quick-prototyping.html) yesterday. A few
[insightul](https://medium.com/@ericclemmons/javascript-fatigue-48d4011b6fc4)
[follow-ups](https://medium.com/@Connorelsea/the-react-curve-3d3b16a54290) have
since made the rounds. The crux of the discussion is that for all of the
increasing sophistication and modularity of web app tooling
these days, it's become increasingly cumbersome to get started with a simple
prototyping project.

I've personally felt this pain on more than one occasion. Excited to try out a new
idea, I bring up my text editor only to realize that I can't remember how to configure
webpack. Or Babel 6 changed a bunch of things that I haven't learned yet, but a library
I want to use depends on it. And on and on. These tooling-related roadblocks can
quickly kill the enthusiasm for an idea.

The [discussion](https://twitter.com/floydophone/status/680226147213426688) around
this issue started by considering the experience of beginners, but soon many
more experienced developers voiced their frustrations with the current state
of webapp tooling. Clearly, both groups of developers are struggling with this,
but their needs are dramatically different.


## Beginners

For those new to web development, we really need to keep the number of suggested
tools and technologies to a minimum. That means no Babel, no JSX, no Webpack, no
Flux/Redux. Before you use these tools you need to understand them. And before
you can understand them, you have to experience the pain points they exist to solve.

A single html file with inline CSS and JS is a great starting point for a beginner.
They can save it locally, instantly use any text editor or environment that they
are comfortable with, and easily publish with something like [Surge](https://surge.sh/).

Of course, using a single html file goes against several web development best
practices, but that is *completely irrelevant* for a beginner. The emphasis should
be on facilitating learning, not conforming to every best practice out of the gate.


## Advanced

For more seasoned developers, part of the problem is the tooling we use
(webpack, babel, etc), once experienced, provide ergonomics that are hard to do without.
I never want to start a project without hot reloading again. It's also increasingly
annoying to eschew ES6 features or write CSS without a preprocessor. If you use
JSX, there's another thing that imposes a build step on your project. These luxuries
trap us in increasingly intricate tooling setups, yet for all but the most trivial
prototypes, I think they provide a net benefit over the lifetime of a project.

It seems people often suggest boilerplates as a solution to the problem. If
someone has already gone to the trouble of setting up all these components together,
why not just pull that in and build on top? Indeed, boilerplates seem to be growing
in popularity and (even more so) in number. However, once you need to deviate from
the boilerplate's built-in conventions, you need to descend into its constituent
tools, sometimes learning them from scratch.

If you're a web developer by trade, I think a *build-your-own-boilerplate* approach
makes the most sense. Instead of cargo-culting someone else's boilerplate project,
take the time to learn your tools thoroughly, set up a boilerplate that you can
quickly clone and extend, and use that for your projects.

With one command your boilerplate should ideally:

* Create a git/hg/whatever repository with an initial commit
* Create a Readme with your project name
* Setup a `package.json` (or the equivalent for your ecosystem of choice)
* Install all of your dependencies
* Start a development server, if applicable
* Open the browser so you can see some `Hello world` output right away

In theory, setting this up should be a one-time cost, paying interest every time you start
a new project. In practice, however, our tools change rapidly and there will always
be temptations to add new libraries and upgrade to the latest and greatest. Resist!
You should really only need to update your boilerplate a few times a year.
